The Project Gutenberg eBook of Everyday birds, by Bradford Torrey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Everyday birds
       Elementary studies

Author: Bradford Torrey

Illustrator: John James Audubon

Release Date: December 17, 2022 [eBook #69563]

Language: English

Produced by: Emmanuel Ackerman, David E. Brown, and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EVERYDAY BIRDS ***





Books by Mr. Torrey.


  FRIENDS ON THE SHELF. 12mo, $1.25, _net_. Postage extra.

  NATURE’S INVITATION. 16mo, $1.10, _net_. Postpaid, $1.21.

  THE CLERK OF THE WOODS. 16mo, $1.10, _net_. Postpaid, $1.20.

  FOOTING IT IN FRANCONIA. 16mo, $1.10, _net_. Postpaid, $1.19.

  EVERYDAY BIRDS. Elementary Studies. With twelve colored Illustrations
    reproduced from Audubon. Square 12mo, $1.00.

  BIRDS IN THE BUSH. 16mo, $1.25.

  A RAMBLER’S LEASE. 16mo, $1.25.

  THE FOOT-PATH WAY. 16mo, gilt top, $1.25.

  A FLORIDA SKETCH-BOOK. 16mo, $1.25.

  SPRING NOTES FROM TENNESSEE. 16mo, $1.25.

  A WORLD OF GREEN HILLS. 16mo, $1.25.


  HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN & CO.
  BOSTON AND NEW YORK.




[Illustration: BLUE JAY

_1. Male._ _2, 3. Females_]




  EVERYDAY BIRDS

  ELEMENTARY STUDIES

  BY
  BRADFORD TORREY

  _WITH TWELVE ILLUSTRATIONS IN
  COLORS AFTER AUDUBON, AND
  TWO FROM PHOTOGRAPHS_

  [Illustration]

  BOSTON AND NEW YORK
  HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY
  The Riverside Press, Cambridge




  COPYRIGHT, 1901, BY BRADFORD TORREY
  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

  FIFTH IMPRESSION




CONTENTS


                                              PAGE

      I. TWO LITTLE KINGS                        1

     II. THE CHICKADEE                           7

    III. THE BROWN CREEPER                      10

     IV. THE BROWN THRASHER                     15

      V. THE BUTCHER-BIRD                       19

     VI. THE SCARLET TANAGER                    22

    VII. THE SONG SPARROW                       26

   VIII. THE FIELD SPARROW AND THE CHIPPER      30

     IX. SOME APRIL SPARROWS                    35

      X. THE ROSE-BREASTED GROSBEAK             40

     XI. THE BLUE JAY                           43

    XII. THE KINGBIRD                           47

   XIII. THE HUMMINGBIRD                        51

    XIV. THE CHIMNEY SWIFT                      56

     XV. NIGHTHAWK AND WHIP-POOR-WILL           59

    XVI. THE FLICKER                            64

   XVII. THE BITTERN                            68

  XVIII. BIRDS FOR EVERYBODY                    82

    XIX. WINTER PENSIONERS                      87

     XX. WATCHING THE PROCESSION                93

    XXI. SOUTHWARD BOUND                        99

         INDEX                                 105




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                  PAGE

  BLUE JAY                    (page 43) _Frontispiece_

  GOLDEN-CROWNED KINGLET                             2

  CHICKADEE                                          8

  BROWN CREEPER                                     12

  BROWN THRASHER                                    16

  SCARLET TANAGER                                   22

  SONG SPARROW                                      26

  ROSE-BREASTED GROSBEAK                            40

  RUBY-THROATED HUMMINGBIRD                         52

  NIGHTHAWK                                         60

  WHIP-POOR-WILL                                    62

  FLICKER                                           66

_The illustrations entitled A Downy Woodpecker and A Branch
Establishment, facing page 88, are from photographs by Mr. Frank M.
Chapman and were first printed in Bird-Lore._




EVERYDAY BIRDS




I

TWO LITTLE KINGS


The largest bird in the United States is the California vulture, or
condor, which measures from tip to tip of its wings nine feet and a
half. At the other end of the scale are the hummingbirds, one kind of
which, at least, has wings that are less than an inch and a half in
length. Next to these insect-like midgets come the birds which have
been well named in Latin “Regulus,” and in English “kinglets,”--that is
to say, little kings. The fitness of the title comes first from their
tiny size,--the chickadee is almost a giant in comparison,--and next
from the fact that they wear patches of bright color (crowns) on their
heads.

Two species of kinglets are found at one season or another in nearly
all parts of the United States, and are known respectively as the
golden-crown--or goldcrest--and the ruby-crown. The golden-crown
has on the top of its head an orange or yellow patch (sometimes one,
sometimes the other) bordered with black; the ruby-crown wears a very
bright red patch, though you may look at many specimens without finding
it. Only part of the birds have it,--the adult males, perhaps,--and
even those that have it do not always display it. The orange or yellow
of the goldcrest, on the other hand, is worn by all the birds, and is
never concealed. If you are a beginner in bird study, uncertain of
your species, look for the black stripes on the crown. If they are not
there, and the bird is really a kinglet, it must be a ruby-crown. You
may know it, also,--from the goldcrest, I mean,--by what looks like a
light-colored ring round the eye. In fact, one of the ruby-crown’s most
noticeable peculiarities is a certain bareheaded, large-eyed appearance.

Unless your home is near or beyond the northern boundary of the United
States, you need not look for either kinglet in summer. The ruby-crown
is to be seen during its migrations in spring and fall, the goldcrest
in fall, winter, and spring.

[Illustration: GOLDEN-CROWNED KINGLET

_1. Male._ _2. Female_]

At any time of the year they are well worth knowing. Nobody could look
at them without admiration; so pretty, so tiny, and so exceedingly
quick and graceful in their motions. Both species are of a prevailing
greenish or olive shade, with noticeable light-colored wing-bars, and
light, unstreaked, unspotted under parts.

The ruby-crown is famous as a singer. A genuine music-box, we may call
him. In spring, especially, he is often bubbling over with melody; a
rapid, wren-like tune, with sundry quirks and turns that are all his
own; on the whole decidedly original, with plenty of what musical
people call accent and a strongly marked rhythm or swing. Over and
over he goes with it, as if he could never have enough; beginning
with quick, separate, almost guttural notes, and winding up with a
_twittity, twittity, twittity_, which, once heard, is not likely to be
soon forgotten.

A very pleasing vocalist he surely is; and when his extreme smallness
is taken into account he is fairly to be esteemed a musical prodigy.
Every one who has written about the song, from Audubon down, has found
it hard to say enough about it. Audubon goes so far as to say that
it is as powerful as a canary’s, and much more varied and pleasing.
That I must think an exaggeration; natural enough, no doubt, under
the circumstances (romantic surroundings count for a good deal in all
questions of this kind), but still a stretching of the truth. However,
I give but my own opinion. Let my readers hear the bird, and judge
for themselves. They will enjoy him, whether or no. Every such new
acquaintance that a man makes is a new source of lifelong happiness.

The enormous California vulture is said to be almost dumb, having “no
vocal apparatus” and “emitting only a weak hissing sound.” What a
contrast between him and the ruby-crown,--a mere speck of a bird, but
with a musical nature and the voice of an artist. Precious stuff, they
say, comes in small packages. Even the youngest of us may have noticed
that it is always the smaller birds that sing.

But if all the singers are small birds, it is not true that all small
birds are singers. The golden-crowned kinglet, for example, is hardly
to be classed under that head. The gifts of Providence are various,
and are somewhat sparingly dealt out. One creature receives one
gift, another creature another,--just as is true of men, women, and
children. This boy “has an ear,” as the saying goes. He is naturally
musical. Give him a chance, and let him not be too much in love with
something else, and he will make a singer, or a player on instruments,
or possibly a composer. His brother has no ear; he can hardly tell Old
Hundred from Yankee Doodle. It is useless for him to “take lessons.”
He can paint, perhaps, or invent a machine, or make money, or edit a
paper, or teach school, or preach sermons, or practice medicine; but he
will never win a name in the concert room.

The case of the golden-crown is hardly so hopeless as that, I am glad
to believe; for if he is not much of a musician now, as he surely is
not, he is not without some signs of an undeveloped musical capacity.
The root of the matter seems to be in him. He tries to sing, at any
rate, and not unlikely, as time goes on,--say in a million or two of
years,--he may become as capable a performer as the ruby-crown is at
present. There is no telling what a creature may make of himself if
his will is good, and he has astronomical time in which to work. The
dullest of us might learn something with a thousand years of schooling.

What you will mostly hear from the goldcrest is no tune, but a hurried
_zee, zee, zee_, repeated at intervals as he flits about the branches
of a tree, or, less often, through the mazes of a piece of shrubbery.
His activity is wonderful, and his motions are really as good as music.
No dancing could be prettier to look at. All you need is eyes to see
him. But you will have to “look sharp.” Now he is there for an instant,
snatching a morsel or letting out a _zee, zee, zee_. Now he is yonder,
resting upon the air, hovering against a tuft of pine needles, his
wings all in a mist, they beat so swiftly. So through the tree he goes,
and from one tree to another, till presently he is gone for good.

Once in a great while you may find him feeding among the dry leaves
on the ground. Then you can really watch him, and had better make the
most of your opportunity. Or you may catch him exploring bushes or low
savins, which is a chance almost as favorable. The great thing is to
become familiar with his voice. With that help you will find him ten
times as often as without it. He is mostly a bird of the woods, and
prefers evergreens, though he does not confine himself to them.

If you do not know him already, it will be a bright and memorable
day--though it be the dead of winter--when you first see him and are
able to call him by his regal name, _Regulus satrapa_. It is a great
pity that so common and lovely a creature, one of the beauties of the
world, should be unseen by so many good people. It is true, as we say
so often about other things, that they do not know what they miss; but
they miss a good deal, notwithstanding.




II

THE CHICKADEE


The chickadee, like many other birds, takes his name from his notes;
from some of his notes, that is to say, for he has many others besides
his best-known _chick-a-dee-dee-dee_. His most musical effort, regarded
by many observers as his true song, sounds to most ears like the name
Phœbe,--a clear, sweet whistle of two or three notes, with what musical
people call a minor interval between them. It is so strictly a whistle
that any boy can imitate it well enough to deceive not only another
boy, but the bird himself.

In late winter and early spring, especially, when the chickadee is in
a peculiarly cheerful frame of mind, it is very easy to draw him out
by whistling these notes in his hearing. Sometimes, however, the sound
seems to fret or anger him, and instead of answering in kind, he will
fly near the intruder, scolding _dee-dee-dee_.

He remains with us both summer and winter, and wears the same colors at
all seasons.

Perhaps no wild bird is more confiding. If a man is at work in the
woods in cold weather, and at luncheon will take a little pains to feed
the chickadees that are sure to be more or less about him, he will soon
have them tame enough to pick up crumbs at his feet, and even to take
them from his hand.

Better even than crumbs is a bit of mince pie, or a piece of suet. I
have myself held out a piece of suet to a chickadee as I walked through
the woods, and have had him fly down at once, perch on my finger like a
tame canary, and fall to eating. But he was a bird that another man, a
woodcutter of my acquaintance, had tamed in the manner above described.

[Illustration: CHICKADEE

_1. Male._ _2. Female_]

The chickadee’s nest is built in a hole, generally in a decayed stump
or branch. It is very pretty to watch the pair when they are digging
out the hole. All the chips are carried away and dropped at a little
distance from the tree, so that the sight of them littering the ground
may not reveal the birds’ secret to an enemy.

Male and female dress alike. The top of the head is black--for which
reason they are called black-capped chickadees, or black-capped
titmice--and the chin is of the same color, while the cheeks are clear
white. If you are not sure that you know the bird, stay near him till
he pronounces his own name. He will be pretty certain to do it,
sooner or later, especially if you excite him a little by squeaking or
chirping to him.

Although the chickadee is small and delicate-looking, he seems not to
mind the very coldest of weather. Give him enough to eat, and the wind
may whistle. He picks his food, tiny insects, insects’ eggs, and the
like, out of crevices in the bark of trees and about the ends of twigs,
and so is seldom or never without resources. The deepest snows do not
cover up his dinner-table. His worst days, no doubt, are those in which
everything is covered with sleet.

One of his prettiest traits is his skill in hanging back downward from
the tip of a swinging branch or from the under side of a leaf while
in search of provender. As a small boy, who had probably been to the
circus, once said, the chickadee is a “first-rate performer on the
flying trapeze.”




III

THE BROWN CREEPER


In the midst of a Massachusetts winter, when a man with his eyes open
may walk five miles over favorable country roads and see only ten or
twelve kinds of birds, the brown creeper’s faint _zeep_ is a truly
welcome sound. He is a very little fellow, very modestly dressed,
without a bright feather on him, his lower parts being white and his
upper parts a mottling of brown and white, such as a tailor might call
a “pepper and salt mixture.”

The creeper’s life seems as quiet as his colors. You will find him by
overhearing his note somewhere on one side of you as you pass. Now
watch him. He is traveling rather quickly, with an alert, business-like
air, up the trunk of a tree in a spiral course, hitching along inch
by inch, hugging the bark, and every little while stopping to probe a
crevice of it with his long, curved, sharply pointed bill. He is in
search of food,--insects’ eggs, grubs, and what not; morsels so tiny
that it need not surprise us to see him spending the whole day in
satisfying his hunger.

There is one thing to be said for such a life: the bird is never
without something to take up his mind. In fact, if he enjoys the
pleasures of the table half as well as some human beings seem to do,
his life ought to be one of the happiest imaginable.

How flat and thin he looks, and how perfectly his colors blend with the
grays and browns of the mossy bark! No wonder it is easy for us to pass
near him without knowing it. We understand now what learned people mean
when they talk about the “protective coloration” of animals. A hawk
flying overhead, on the lookout for game, must have hard work to see
this bit of a bird clinging so closely to the bark as to be almost a
part of it.

And if a hawk does pass, you may be pretty sure the creeper will see
him, and will flatten himself still more tightly against the tree and
stay as motionless as the bark itself. He needs neither to fight nor to
run away. His strength, as the prophet said, is to sit still.

But look! As the creeper comes to the upper part of the tree, where the
bark is less furrowed than it is below, and therefore less likely to
conceal the scraps of provender that he is in search of, he suddenly
lets go his hold and flies down to the foot of another tree, and begins
again to creep upward. If you keep track of him, you will see him do
this hour after hour. He never walks down. Up, up, he goes, and if you
look sharply enough, you will see that whenever he pauses he makes use
of his sharp, stiff tail-feathers as a rest--a kind of camp-stool, as
it were, or, better still, a bracket. He is built for his work; color,
bill, feet, tail-feathers--all were made on purpose for him.

He is a native of the northern country, and therefore to most readers
of this book he is a winter bird only. If you know his voice, you will
hear him twenty times for once that you see him. If you know neither
him nor his voice, it will be worth your while to make his acquaintance.

When you come upon a little bunch of chickadees flitting through the
woods, listen for a quick, lisping note that is something like theirs,
but different. It may be the creeper’s, for although he seems an
unsocial fellow, seldom flocking with birds of his own kind, he is fond
of the chickadee’s cheerful companionship.

[Illustration: BROWN CREEPER

_1. Male._ _2. Female_]

To see him and hear his _zeep_, you would never take him for a
songster; but there is no telling by the looks of a bird how well he
can sing. In fact, plainly dressed birds are, as a rule, the best
musicians. The very handsome ones have no need to charm with the voice.
And our modest little creeper has a song, and a fairly good one; one
that answers his purpose, at all events, although it may never make him
famous. In springtime it may be heard now and then even in a place like
Boston Common; but of course you must go where the birds pair and nest
if you would hear them at their finest; for birds, like other people,
sing best when they feel happiest.

The brown creeper’s nest used to be something of a mystery. It was
sought for in woodpeckers’ holes. Now it is known that as a general
thing it is built behind a scale of loose bark on a dead tree, between
the bark and the trunk. Ordinarily, if not always, it will be found
under a flake that is loose at the bottom instead of at the top. Into
such a place the female bird packs tightly a mass of twigs and strips
of the soft inner bark of trees, and on the top of this prepares her
nest and lays her eggs. Her mate flits to and fro, keeping her company,
and once in a while cheering her with a song, but so far as has yet
been discovered he takes no hand in the work itself. It is quite
possible that the female, who is to occupy the nest, prefers to have
her own way in the construction of it.

After the young ones are hatched, at all events, the father bird’s
behavior leaves nothing to be complained of. He “comes to time,” as we
say, in the most loyal manner. In and out of the nest he and the mother
go, feeding their hungry charges, making their entry and exit always
at the same point, through the merest crack of a door, between the
overhanging bark and the tree, just above the nest. It is a very pretty
bit of family life.

It would be hard to imagine a nest better concealed from a bird’s
natural enemies, especially when, as is often the case, the tree stands
in water on the edge of a stream or lake. And not only is the nest
wonderfully well hidden, but it is perfectly sheltered from rain, as
it would not be if it were built under a strip of bark that was peeled
from above. All in all, we must respect the simple, demure-looking
creeper as a very clever architect.




IV

THE BROWN THRASHER


The brown thrasher--called also the brown thrush--is a bird
considerably longer than a robin, with a noticeably long tail and a
long, curved bill. His upper parts are reddish brown or cinnamon color,
and his lower parts white or whitish, boldly streaked with black. You
will find him in hedgerows, in scrub-lands, and about the edges of
woods, where he keeps mostly on or near the ground. His general manner
is that of a creature who wishes nothing else so much as to escape
notice. “Only let me alone,” he seems to say. If he sees you coming,
as he pretty certainly will, he dodges into the nearest thicket or
barberry-bush, and waits for you to pass.

Farmers know him as the “planting-bird.” In New England he makes his
appearance with commendable punctuality between the twentieth of April
and the first of May; and while the farmer is planting his garden, the
thrasher encourages him with song. One man, who was planting beans,
imagined that the bird said, “Drop it, drop it! Cover it up, cover it
up!” Perhaps he did. It was good advice, anyhow.

In his own way the thrasher is one of the great singers of the world.
He is own cousin to the famous mockingbird, and at the South, where he
and the mocker may be heard singing side by side,--and so much alike
that it is hard to tell one from the other,--he is known as the “brown
mockingbird.” He would deserve the title but for one thing--he does not
mock. In that respect he falls far short of his gray cousin, who not
only has all the thrasher’s gift of original song, but a most amazing
faculty of imitation, as every one knows who has heard even a caged
mockingbird running over the medley of notes he has picked up here and
there and carefully rehearsed and remembered. The thrasher’s song is a
medley, but not a medley of imitations.

I have said that the thrasher keeps near the ground. Such is his habit;
but there is one exception. When he sings he takes the very top of a
tree, although usually it is not a tall one. There he stands by the
half-hour together, head up and tail down, pouring out a flood of
music; sounds of all sorts, high notes and low notes, smooth notes and
rough notes, all jumbled together in the craziest fashion, as if the
musician were really beside himself.

[Illustration: BROWN THRASHER

_1, 2, 3. Males._ _4. Female_]

It is a performance worth buying a ticket for and going miles to hear;
but it is to be heard without price on the outskirts of almost any
village in the United States east of the Rocky Mountains and south of
Maine. You must go out at the right time, however, for the bird sings
but a few weeks in the year, although he remains in New England almost
six months, or till the middle of October. He is one of the birds that
every one should know, since it is perfectly easy to identify him;
and once known, he is never to be forgotten, or to be confounded with
anything else.

The thrasher’s nest is a rude, careless-looking structure, made of
twigs, roots, and dry leaves, and is to be looked for on the ground,
or in a bush not far above it. Often it has so much the appearance of
a last year’s affair that one is tempted to pass it as unworthy of
notice. I have been fooled in that way more than once.

The bird sits close, as the saying is, and as she stares at you with
her yellow eyes, full at once of courage and fear, you will need a hard
heart to disturb her. Sometimes she will really show fight, and she
has been known to drive a small boy off the field. Her whistle after
she has been frightened from her eggs or nestlings is one of the most
pathetic sounds in nature. I should feel sorry for the boy who could
hear it without pity.

Besides this mournful whistle, the thrasher has a note almost exactly
like a smacking kiss,--very realistic,--and sometimes, especially
at dusk, an uncanny, ghostly whisper, that seems meant expressly to
suggest the presence of something unearthly and awful. So far as I am
aware, there is no other bird-note like it. I have no doubt that many
a superstitious person has taken to his heels on hearing it from the
bushes along a lonesome roadside after nightfall.

Except in the spring, indeed, there is little about the thrasher’s
appearance or behavior to suggest pleasant thoughts. To me, at any
rate, he seems a creature of chronic low spirits. The world has used
him badly, and he cannot get over it. He is almost the only bird I ever
see without a little inspiration of cheerfulness. Perhaps I misjudge
him.

Let my young readers make his acquaintance on their own account, if
they have not already done so, and find him a livelier creature than I
have described him, if they can.




V

THE BUTCHER-BIRD


“Butcher-bird” is not a very pretty name, but it is expressive and
appropriate, and so is likely to stick quite as long as the more
bookish word “shrike,” which is the bird’s other title. It comes from
its owner’s habit of impaling the carcasses of its prey upon thorns, as
a butcher hangs upon a hook the body of a pig or other animal that he
has slaughtered.

In a place like the Public Garden of Boston, if a shrike happens to
make it his hunting-ground for a week or two, you may find here and
there in the hawthorn-trees the body of a mouse or the headless trunk
of an English sparrow spitted upon a thorn. Grasshoppers are said to be
treated in a similar manner, but I have never met with the bird’s work
in the grasshopper season.

The shrike commonly seen in the Northern States is a native of the
far north, and comes down to our latitude only in cold weather. He
travels singly, and if he finds a place to suit him, a place where the
living is good, he will often remain almost in the same spot for weeks
together.

In size and appearance he resembles the mockingbird. His colors are
gray, black, and white, his tail is long, and his bill is hooked like a
hawk’s.

He likes a perch from which he can see a good distance about him. A
telegraph wire answers his purpose very well, but his commonest seat
is the very tip of a tallish tree. If you look across a field in
winter and descry a medium-sized bird swaying on the topmost twig of
a lonesome tree, balancing himself by continual tiltings of his long
tail, you may set him down as most likely a butcher-bird.

His flight is generally not far from the ground, but as he draws near
the tree in which he means to alight, he turns suddenly upward. It
would be surprising to see him alight on one of the lower branches, or
anywhere, indeed, except at the topmost point.

Small birds are all at once scarce and silent when the shrike appears.
Sometimes in his hunger he will attack a bird heavier than himself. I
had once stopped to look at a flicker in a roadside apple-tree, when I
suddenly noticed a butcher-bird not far off. At the same moment, as it
seemed, the butcher-bird caught sight of the flicker, and made a swoop
toward him. The flicker, somewhat to my surprise, showed no sign of
panic, or even of fear. He simply moved aside, as much as to say, “Oh,
stop that! Don’t bother me!” How the affair would have resulted, I
cannot tell. To my regret, the shrike at that moment seemed to become
aware of a man’s presence, and flew away, leaving the woodpecker to
pursue his exploration of the apple-tree at his leisure.

The shrike has a very curious habit of singing, or of trying to sing,
in the disjointed manner of a catbird. I have many times heard him
thus engaged, and can bear witness that some of his tones are really
musical. Some people have supposed that at such times he is trying to
decoy small birds, but to me the performance has always seemed like
music, or an attempt at music, rather than strategy.

Southern readers may be presumed to be familiar with another shrike,
known as the loggerhead. As I have seen him in Florida he is a very
tame, unsuspicious creature, nesting in the shade-trees of towns. The
“French mockingbird,” a planter told me he was called. Mr. Chapman
has seen one fly fifty yards to catch a grasshopper which, to all
appearance, he had sighted before quitting his perch. The power of
flight is not the only point as to which birds have the advantage of
human beings.




VI

THE SCARLET TANAGER


When I began to learn the birds, I was living in a large city. One of
the first things I did, after buying a book, was to visit a cabinet
of mounted specimens--“stuffed birds,” as we often call them. Such a
wonderful and confusing variety as there was to my ignorant eyes! Among
them I remarked especially a gorgeous scarlet creature with black wings
and a black tail. It was labeled the scarlet tanager. So far as I was
concerned, it could not have looked more foreign if it had come from
Borneo. My book told me that it was common in Massachusetts. It _might_
be, I thought, but I had never seen it there. And a bird so splendid as
that! Bright enough to set the woods on fire! How could I have missed
it?

[Illustration: SCARLET TANAGER

_1. Male._ _2. Female_]

Well, there came a Saturday, with its half-holiday for clerks, and I
went into the country, where I betook myself to the woods of my native
village, the woods wherein I had rambled all the years of my boyhood.
And that afternoon, before I came out of them, I put my opera-glass
on two of those wonderful scarlet and black birds. It was a day to be
remembered.

Since that time, of course, I have seen many like them. In one sense,
their beauty has become to me an old story; but I hope that I have set
here and there a reader on a hunt that has been as happily rewarded as
mine was on that bright summer afternoon. In one respect, the beginner
has a great advantage over an old hand. He has the pleasure of more
excitement and surprise.

The bird to be looked for is a little longer than a bluebird, of a
superb scarlet color except for its wings and tail, which, as I have
said, are jet black. I speak of the male in full spring costume. His
mate does not show so much as a red feather, but is greenish yellow, or
yellowish green, with dark--not black--wings and tail.

You may see the tanager once in a while in the neighborhood of your
house, if the grounds are set with shade-trees, but for the most part
he lives in woods, especially in hard woods of a fairly old growth.

One of the first things for you to do, with him as with all birds, is
to acquaint yourself with his call-notes and his song. The call is of
two syllables, and sounds like _chip-chirr_. It is easily remembered
after you have once seen the bird in the act of uttering it. The song
is much in the manner of the robin’s, but less smooth and flowing. I
have often thought, and sometimes said, that it is just such a song as
the robin might give us if he were afflicted with what people call a
“hoarse cold.” The bird sings as if his whole heart were engaged, but
at the same time in a noticeably broken and short-winded style.

The oftener you hear him, the easier you will find it to distinguish
him from a robin, although at first you may find yourself badly at a
loss. A boy that can tell any one of twenty playmates by the tones of
his voice alone will need nothing but practice and attention to do the
same for a great part of the sixty or seventy kinds of common birds
living in the woods and fields about him.

The tanager’s nest is built in a tree, on the flat of a level branch,
so to speak, generally toward the end. Sometimes, at any rate, it is a
surprisingly loose, carelessly constructed thing, through the bottom of
which one can see the blue or bluish eggs while standing on the ground
underneath.

It must be plain to any one that the mother bird, in her dull greenish
dress, is much less easily seen, and therefore much less in danger, as
she sits brooding, than she would be if she wore the flaming scarlet
feathers that render her mate so handsome.

Southern readers will know also another kind of tanager, not red and
black, but red all over. He, too, is a great beauty, although if the
question were left to me, I could not give him the palm over his more
northern relative. The red of the southern bird is of a different
shade--“rose-red” or “vermilion,” the books call it. He sings like the
scarlet tanager, but in a smoother voice. Although he is a red _bird_,
he is not to be confounded with the southern _red_-bird. The latter,
better known as the cardinal grosbeak, is a thick-billed bird of the
sparrow and finch family. He is frequently seen in cages, and is a
royal whistler.

The scarlet tanager--the male in red and black plumage--is not to be
mistaken for anything else in the Eastern States. Once see him, and
you will always know him. For that reason he is an excellent subject
for the beginner. He passes the winter in Central or South America,
and returns to New England in the second week of May. He makes his
appearance in full dress, but later in the season changes it for one
resembling pretty closely the duller plumage of his mate.




VII

THE SONG SPARROW


Sparrows are of many kinds, and in a general way the different kinds
look so much alike that the beginner in bird study is apt to find
them confusing, if not discouraging. They will try his patience, no
matter how sharp and clever he may think himself, and unless he is much
cleverer than the common run of humanity, he will make a good many
mistakes before he gets to the end of them.

One of the best and commonest of them all is the song sparrow. His
upper parts are mottled, of course, since he is a sparrow. His
light-colored breast is sharply streaked, and in the middle of it the
streaks usually run together and form a blotch. His outer tail-feathers
are not white, and there is no yellow on the wings or about the head.
These last points are mentioned in order to distinguish him from two
other sparrows with streaked breasts--the vesper sparrow and the
savanna.

[Illustration: SONG SPARROW

_1. Male._ _2. Female_]

By the middle of March song sparrows reach New England in
crowds,--along with robins and red-winged blackbirds,--and are to be
heard singing on all hands, especially in the neighborhood of water.
They remain until late autumn, and here and there one will be found
even in midwinter.

The song, for which this sparrow is particularly distinguished, is a
bright and lively strain, nothing very great in itself, perhaps, but
thrice welcome for being heard so early in the season, when the ear is
hungry after the long winter silence. Its chief distinction, however,
is its amazing variety. Not only do no two birds sing precisely alike,
but the same bird sings many tunes.

Of this latter fact, which I have known some excellent people to be
skeptical about, you can readily satisfy yourself,--and there is
nothing like knowing a thing at first hand,--if you will take the pains
to keep a singer under your eye at the height of the musical season.
You will find that he repeats one strain for perhaps a dozen times,
without the change of a note; then suddenly he comes out with a song
entirely different. This second song he will in turn drop for a third,
and so on. The bird acts, for all the world, as if he were singing
hymns, of so many verses each, one after another.

It is really a wonderful performance. There are very few kinds of birds
that do anything like it. Of itself it is enough to make the song
sparrow famous, and it is well worth any one’s while to hear it and see
it done. Nobody can see it without believing that birds have a true
appreciation of music. They are better off than some human beings, at
all events. They know one tune from another.

A lady correspondent was good enough to send me, not long ago, a
pleasing account of the doings of a pair of song sparrows, which, as
she says, came to her for six seasons.

“One year,” she writes, “they happened to build where I could watch
them from the window, and they did a very curious thing. They fed the
little birds with all sorts of worms of different colors until they
were ready to leave the nest; then the male brought a pure white moth
and held it near the nest, which was in some stems of a rosebush a few
inches from the ground, on a level with the lower rail of a picket
fence.

“One of the little birds came out of the nest at once and followed its
parent, who went sidewise, always holding the dazzling white morsel
just out of the youngster’s reach. In this manner they crossed the
lane, climbed the inclined plane of a woodpile, and passed through a
fence and across a vegetable garden into an asparagus bed, in which
miniature forest the little traveler received and ate the moth.

“Another nest was built on the bank of a brook on the farther side of
a road. Out of this nest I saw two little fellows coaxed with these
snow-white moths, and led across the dusty road into a hedge.”

One or two experiences of this kind are sufficient reward for a good
deal of patient observation. The singer of this pair of birds, my
correspondent says, had ten distinct songs, one of them exceedingly
beautiful and peculiar.

The song sparrow’s nest is usually built on the ground, and the bird is
one of several kinds that are known indiscriminately by country people
as ground sparrows.

Song sparrows seem to be of a pretty nervous disposition, to judge from
their behavior. One of their noticeable characteristics is a twitching,
up-and-down, “pumping” motion of the tail, as they dash into cover on
being disturbed.

People who live in the Southern States see these birds only in the
cooler part of the year, but must have abundant opportunity to hear
them sing as spring approaches.




VIII

THE FIELD SPARROW AND THE CHIPPER


All beginners in bird study find the sparrow family a hard one.
There are so many kinds of sparrows, and the different kinds look so
confusingly alike. How shall I ever be able to tell them apart? the
novice says to himself.

Well, there is no royal road to such learning, it may as well be
confessed. But there is a road, for all that, and a pretty good
one,--the road of patience; and there is much pleasure to be had
in following it. If you know one sparrow, be it only the so-called
“English,” you have made a beginning.

_If_ you know the English sparrow, I say; for, strange as it may seem,
I find numbers of people who do not. Take the average inhabitant of any
of our large cities into the country, and let him come upon an English
sparrow in a wayside hedge, and there are three chances to one that he
will not know with certainty what to call it. Quite as likely as not he
has never noticed that there are two kinds of English sparrows, very
differently feathered--the male and the female.

In a short chapter like this I am not going to attempt a miracle. If
you read it to the end, never so carefully, you will not be prepared to
name all the sparrows at sight. As I said before, they are a hard set.
My wish now is to speak of two of the smallest and commonest.

One of these is called sometimes the chipping sparrow, sometimes
the chipper, and sometimes--much less often--the doorstep sparrow.
Personally, I like the last name best,--perhaps because I invented it.
Scientific men, who prefer for excellent reasons to have their own
names for things, call him _Spizella socialis_--that is to say, the
familiar or social little spiza, or sparrow. The idea of littleness,
some young readers may not know, is contained in the termination
_ella_, which is what grammarians call a diminutive. Umbrella, for
instance, is literally a small _umbra_, or shade.

With most readers of this book the chipping sparrow is a bird of
spring, summer, and autumn. For the winter he retires to our extreme
Southern States and to Mexico. If you live in Massachusetts, you may
begin to be on the watch for him by the 5th of April. If your home is
farther south, you should see him somewhat earlier.

Perhaps you will know him by this brief description: a very small,
slender sparrow, with a dark chestnut-red crown, a black forehead, a
black bill, and plain--unstreaked and unspotted--under parts.

His ordinary note, or call, is a _chip_ (whence his name), and his song
is a very dry, tuneless, monotonous, long-drawn _chippy-chippy-chippy_,
uttered so fast as to sound almost like a trill. You may like the bird
never so well, but if you have any idea of music, you will never call
him a fine singer. What he and his mate think about the matter there
is, of course, no telling. He seems to be very much in earnest, at all
events.

He is a social bird, I say. You will not have to go far afield or
into the woods in search of him. If you live in any sort of country
place, with a bit of garden and a few shrubs and fruit trees, a pair of
chippers will be likely to find you out. Their nest will be built in a
tree or bush, a small structure neatly lined with hair, and in due time
it will contain four or five eggs, blue or greenish blue, with brown
spots.

Our other bird is of the chipper’s size, and, like him, has unstreaked
and unspotted lower parts. His bill is of a light color, “reddish
brown,” one book says, “pale reddish,” says another. This is one of the
principal marks for the beginner to notice. Another is a wash of buff,
or yellowish brown, on the sides of the breast. The upper parts, too,
are in general much lighter than the chipper’s.

You will not be likely often to find this bird in your garden or about
the lawn. He is called the field sparrow, but he lives mostly in dry
old pastures, partly overgrown with bushes and trees. His nest is
placed on the ground, or in a low bush, and is often lined wholly or in
part with hair. He and the chipper belong to what is called the same
genus. That is to say, the two are so nearly related that they have the
same surname. The chipper is _Spizella socialis_, the field sparrow is
_Spizella pusilla_; just as two brothers will have one name in common,
say, Jones, William, and Jones, Andrew.

The chipper is a favorite on account of his familiar, friendly ways.
The field sparrow deserves to be known and loved for his music. Few
birds sing better, in my opinion, though many make more display and
are more talked about. The beauty of the song is in its sweetness,
simplicity, and perfect taste. It begins with three or four longer
notes, which run at once into quicker and shorter ones, either on the
same pitch or a little higher. Really the strain is almost too simple
to make a description of: a simple line of pure melody, one may say.
You must hear it for yourself. Sometimes the bird gives it out double,
so to speak, catching it up again just as he seems ready to finish.
The tone is the clearest of whistles, and the whole effect is most
delightful and soothing. It is worth anybody’s while to spend a season
or two in bird study, if only to learn this and half a dozen more
pieces of our common wild-bird music.

The field sparrow’s times of arrival and departure are practically the
same as the chipper’s. Neither bird is hard to see, or very hard to
distinguish; a bit of patience and an opera-glass will do the business;
though you may have to puzzle awhile over either of them before making
quite sure of your knowledge. In bird study, as in any other, we learn
by correcting our own mistakes.




IX

SOME APRIL SPARROWS


For the first three weeks of April the ornithologist goes comparatively
seldom into the woods. Millions of birds have come up from the South,
but the forest is still almost deserted. May, with its hosts of
warblers, will bring a grand change in this respect; meanwhile the
sparrows are in the ascendant, and we shall do well to follow the road
for the most part, though with frequent excursions across fields and
into gardens and orchards. Of eighty-four species of birds seen by me
in April, a year ago, twenty-one were water birds, and of the remaining
sixty-three, twenty, or almost one third, were members of the sparrow
family, while only five were warblers. In May, on the other hand, out
of one hundred and twenty-five species seen twenty-three were warblers,
and only eighteen were sparrows. To represent the case fairly, however,
the comparison should be by individuals rather than by species, and
for such a comparison I have no adequate data. My own opinion is that
of all the birds commonly seen in April, more than half, perhaps as
many as four fifths, are members of the sparrow family. There are days,
indeed, when the song sparrows alone seem to outnumber all other birds,
and other days when the same is true of the snowbirds.

The large and noble sparrow family, which includes not only the
sparrows, commonly so called, but finches, grosbeaks, crossbills,
snowbirds, buntings, and the like, is represented in North America by
more than ninety species, and in Massachusetts by about forty. It is
preëminently a musical family, and, with us at least, April is the
best month of the twelve in which to appreciate its lyrical efforts,
notwithstanding the fact that one of its most distinguished songsters,
the rose-breasted grosbeak, is still absent.

Among the more gifted of its April representatives are the fox
sparrow,--so named from his color,--the purple finch, the song sparrow,
the vesper sparrow, the tree sparrow, the field sparrow, and the
white-throated sparrow--seven common birds, every one of them deserving
to be known by any who care for sweet sounds.

One of the seven, the purple finch, also called the linnet, is
unlike all the others, and easily excels them all in the fluency and
copiousness of his music. He is readily distinguishable--in adult male
plumage--as a sparrow whose head and neck appear to have been dipped in
carmine ink, or perhaps in pokeberry juice. His song is a prolonged,
rapid, unbroken warble, which he is much given to delivering while on
the wing, hovering ecstatically and singing as if he would pour out
his very soul. He is a familiar bird, a lover of orchards and roadside
trees, but is not so universally distributed, probably, as most of the
other species I have named.

In contrast with the purple finch, all the six sparrows here mentioned
with him have brief and rather formal songs. Those of the fox sparrow
and the tree sparrow bear a pretty strong resemblance to each other,
especially as to cadence or inflection; the song sparrow’s and the
vesper sparrow’s are still more closely alike, and will almost
certainly confuse the novice, while those of the field sparrow and the
white-throat are each quite unique.

The fox sparrow visits Massachusetts as a migrant only, and the same
might be said of the white-throat, only that it breeds in Berkshire
County and single birds are often seen in the eastern part of the State
during the winter. The tree sparrow is a winter resident, going far
north to rear its young, and the remaining four species are with us for
the summer.

The fox sparrow is to be heard from the 20th of March (I speak
roughly) to the middle of April. In respect to voice and cadence, he
is to me the finest of our sparrows proper, though I do not think
him so finished an artist as the song and vesper sparrows. He may be
recognized by his superior size and his bright rusty-red (reddish
brown) color. Indeed, these two features give him at first sight the
appearance of a thrush. He is one of the sparrows--like the song, the
vesper, the savanna, and the Ipswich--which are thickly streaked upon
the breast.

The tree sparrow passes the winter with us, as I have said, but abounds
only during the two migrations. He is in full song for the greater
part of April. His distinctive marks are a bright reddish (“chestnut”)
crown, conspicuous white wing-bars, and an obscure round blotch in the
middle of his unstreaked breast.

The white-throat, commonly a very abundant migrant, arrives about the
20th of April and remains till about the middle of May. His loud,
clear song is remarkable for its peculiar and strongly marked rhythm.
It consists of two comparatively long introductory notes, followed by
three sets of triplets in monotone--like _see, see, peabody, peabody,
peabody_. This bird, too, perplexing as the sparrows are usually
thought to be, is perfectly well marked, with a white throat (not
merely a white chin, as in the swamp sparrow) and a broad white stripe
on each side of the crown, turning to yellow in front of the eyes. The
crown itself is dark, with a white line through the middle, and each
wing is adorned with two white bars. In size the white-throat comes
next to the fox sparrow.

The song sparrow and the vesper sparrow not only sing alike, but look
alike. The latter may be told at once, however, by his white outer
tail-feathers, which show as he flies. These are two of our commonest
and worthiest birds. The vesper sparrow, more generally known, perhaps,
as the bay-winged bunting, likes a drier field than the song sparrow,
and is especially noticeable for his trick of running along the path or
the road directly in front of the traveler.




X

THE ROSE-BREASTED GROSBEAK


There is never a May passes, of recent years, but some one comes to me,
or writes to me, to inquire about a wonderfully beautiful bird that he
has just seen for the first time. He does hope I can tell him what it
is. It is a pretty large bird, he goes on to say,--but not so long as a
robin, he thinks, if I question him,--mostly black and white, but with
such a splendid rosy patch on his breast or throat! What can it be?
He had no idea that anything so handsome was ever to be seen in these
parts.

If all the questions that people ask about birds were as easily
answered as this one, I should be thankful. It is a rose-breasted
grosbeak, I tell the inquirer. Perhaps he noticed that its bill was
uncommonly stout. If he did, the fact is exceptional, for somehow the
shape of the bill is a point which the average person seems very seldom
to notice, although it is highly important. Anyhow, the rosebreast’s
beak is most decidedly “gross.” And he is every whit as beautiful as
my inquirer represents him to be. In that respect he ranks with the
oriole and the scarlet tanager.

[Illustration: ROSE-BREASTED GROSBEAK

_1. Males._ _2. Female._ _3. Young Male_]

He is distinguished also for his song, which is a flowing warble,
wonderfully smooth and sweet. To most ears it bears a likeness to the
robin’s song, but it is beyond comparison more fluent and delicious,
although not more hearty. Keep your ear open for such a voice,--by the
middle of May if you live in New England, a little earlier if your home
is farther south,--and you will be likely to hear it; for at that time
the bird is not only common, but a very free singer.

In addition to his song, the rosebreast has a short call-note, which
sounds very much like the squeak of a pair of rusty shears--a kind of
_hic_, which you will find no difficulty about remembering if you have
once learned it. His nest is generally built in a bush, often within
reach of the hand, but I have seen it well up in a rather tall tree.
The two birds spell each other in brooding, and are not only mutually
affectionate, but very brave. I have known the mother bird to keep her
seat even when I took hold of the bush below the nest and drew her
almost against my face. She, by the way, is a very modestly dressed
body, being not only without the rose-color, but without the clear
contrast of black and white. To look at her, you might take her for a
large sparrow.

The rose-color of the male, it should be said, is not confined to the
patch on the breast, but is found also on the lining of the wings,
where it is mostly unnoticed by the world, but where his mate, of
course, cannot help admiring it as he flutters about her; for it is
certain that female birds have a good eye for color, and believe that
fine feathers help, at least, to make fine birds. The shade is of
the brightest and most exquisite, and the total effect of the male’s
plumage--jet black, pure white, and vivid rose-red--is quite beyond
praise.

The birds, happily, are not shy, and prefer a fairly open or broken
country rather than a dense wood. Last season one sang day after day
directly under my windows, and undoubtedly had a mate and a nest
somewhere close by. The male, it should be added, has the very pretty
though dangerous-seeming habit of singing as he sits upon the eggs.




XI

THE BLUE JAY


Some years ago, as the story comes to me, two collectors of birds met
by accident in South America, one of them from Europe, the other from
the United States. “There is one bird that I would rather see than any
other in the world,” said the European. “It is the handsomest of all
the birds that fly, to my thinking, although I know it only in the
cabinet. You have it in North America, but I suppose you do not often
see it. I mean the blue jay.”

What the American answered in words, I do not know; but I am pretty
confident that he smiled. The European might almost as well have said
that he supposed Boston people did not often see an English sparrow.
Not that the blue jay swarms everywhere as the foreign sparrow swarms
in our American cities; but it is so common, so noisy, so conspicuous,
and so unmistakable, that it is, or ought to be, almost an everyday
sight to all country dwellers.

Strange as it seems, however, I find many people who do not know the
jay when they see it. In late winter, say toward the end of February,
when I begin to be on the lookout for the first bluebird of the year,
I am all but certain to have word brought to me by some one of the
village school-teachers that bluebirds have already come. Johnny This
or Jimmy That saw one near his house several weeks ago! That “several
weeks ago” makes me suspicious, and on following up the matter I
discover that John and James have seen a large blue bird, larger than a
robin, with some black and white on him--_all_ white underneath--_and_
wearing a tall crest or topknot. Then I know that they have mistaken a
blue _bird_ for a _blue_bird. They have seen a blue jay, a bird of a
very different feather. He has been with us all winter, as he always
is, and has been in sight from my windows daily. So easy is it for boys
and men to guess at things, and guess wrong.

The jay is a relative of the crow, and has much of the crow’s
cleverness, with more than the crow’s beauty. Like the crow, if he
has an errand near houses, he makes a point of doing it in the early
morning before the folks who live in the houses have begun to stir
about. In fact, he knows us, in some respects at least, better than we
know him, and habitually takes advantage of what no doubt seems to him
a custom of very late rising on the part of human beings.

Among small birds of all sorts he bears a decidedly bad name. In
nesting time you may hear them uttering a chorus of loud and bitter
laments as often as he appears among them. Their eggs and young are
in danger, and they join forces to worry him and drive him away. One
bird sounds the alarm, another hears him and hastens to see what is
going on, and in a few minutes the whole neighborhood is awake. And it
stays awake till the jay moves off. After that piece of evidence, you
do not need to _see_ him doing mischief. The little birds’ behavior is
sufficiently convincing. As Thoreau said, the presence of a trout in
the milk is something like proof.

And jays, in their turn, club together against enemies larger than
themselves. Last autumn I was walking through the woods with a
friend,--a city schoolmaster eager for knowledge, as every schoolmaster
ought to be,--when we heard a great screaming of blue jays from a
swampy thicket on our right hand.

“Now what do you suppose the birds mean by all that outcry?” said my
friend.

I answered that very likely there was a hawk or an owl there.

“Let’s go and see,” said the master, and we turned in that direction.
Sure enough, we soon came face to face with a large hen-hawk perched in
one of the trees, while the jays, one after another, were dashing as
near him as they dared, yelling at him as they passed.

At our nearer approach the hawk took wing; then the jays disappeared,
and silence fell upon the woods. And I dare say the schoolmaster gave
me credit for being a wondrously wise man!

The jay has many notes, and once in a great while may even be heard
indulging in something like a warble. One of his most musical calls
sounds to my ears a little like the word “lily.”

He seems to be very fond of acorns, and is frequently to be seen
standing upon a limb, holding an acorn under his claw and hammering it
to pieces with all the force of his stout bill. When angered, he scolds
violently, bobbing up and down in a most ridiculous manner. In fact, he
is of a highly nervous temperament, and as full of gesticulations as a
Frenchman.

To me he is especially a bird of autumn. At that season the woods are
loud with his clarion, and as I listen to it I can often feel myself a
boy again, rambling in the woods that knew me in my school-days. With
all his faults--his ill treatment of small birds, I mean--I should be
sorry to have his numbers greatly diminished.




XII

THE KINGBIRD


As a very small boy I spent much time in a certain piece of rather
low ground partly grown up to bushes. Here in early spring I picked
bunches of pretty pink and white flowers, which I now know to have been
anemones. In the same place, a month or two later, I gathered splendid
red lilies, and admired, without gathering it, a tiny blue flower with
a yellow centre. This would not bear taking home, but was always an
attraction to me. I should have liked it better still, I am sure, if
some one had been kind enough to tell me its pretty name--blue-eyed
grass.

Here, also, I picked the first strawberries of the season and the first
blueberries. They were luxuries indeed. A “gill-cup” full of either of
them was good pay for an hour’s search.

In one corner of the place there were half a dozen or so of
apple-trees, and on the topmost branches of these there used to perch
continually two or three birds of a kind which some older boy told me
were kingbirds. At these my brother and I--both of us small enough to
be excusable for such mischief--were in the habit of throwing green
apples; partly to see how near we could come to hitting them, partly
for the fun of watching them rise into the air, circle about with sharp
cries, and then settle back upon the perches they had left. Sometimes
we stuck the half-grown apple on the end of a stick, swung the stick
round our heads, and sent the apple flying to a tremendous distance.
Stick or no stick, however, we were in no danger of killing anything,
as I am glad now to remember.

What amazed us was that the birds did not go away. No matter how long
we “appled” them, they were certain to be on hand the next day in the
same place. We must have been very young and very green,--greener even
than the apples,--for it never occurred to us that the birds had nests
in the trees, and for that reason were not to be driven away by our
petty persecutions.

Even then I noticed the peculiar flight of the birds--the short, quick
strokes of their wings, and their habit of hovering. These are among
the signs by which the kingbird can be recognized a long way off. He
is dark-colored above,--almost black,--pure white underneath, and his
tail, when outspread, shows a broad white border at the tip. On his
crown is an orange-red patch, but you will probably never see it unless
you have the bird in your hand and brush apart the feathers in search
of it.

The kingbird’s Latin name has much the same meaning as his common
English one. _Tyrannus tyrannus_ he is called by scientific people. He
belongs to a family known as flycatchers, birds that catch insects on
the wing. That is the reason why the kingbird likes a perch at the tip
of something, so that he can dart out after a passing insect, catch it,
and return to his perch to wait for another. _I_ should call him the
“apple-tree flycatcher,” if the matter were referred to me.

He is not large,--little bigger than an English sparrow,--but he has
plenty of courage and a strong disposition to “rule the roost,” as the
saying goes. Every country boy has laughed to see the kingbird chasing
a crow. And a very lively and pleasing sight it is: the crow making for
the nearest wood as fast as his wings will carry him, and one or two
kingbirds in hot pursuit. Their great aim is to get above him and swoop
down upon his back. Sometimes you will see one actually alight on a
crow’s back and, as boys say, “give it to him” in great style.

Another taking action of the kingbird is his trick of flying straight
up in the air, almost perpendicularly, as if he were trying to see
how near he could come to performing that impossible feat, and then
tumbling about madly, with noisy outcries. Often it looks as if he
actually turned somersaults. He cannot sing, and so has to let his high
spirits bubble over in these half-crazy gymnastics. All in all, he is a
very lively and entertaining customer.

His nest is built in a tree, often in an orchard, and is comparatively
easy to find. The birds arrive in New England in the first week of May,
having passed the winter in Central or South America, and remain till
the end of August.

Like most birds, they are very punctual in their coming and going. No
doubt they have an almanac of their own. You will do well to find one
of them in Massachusetts after the first two or three days of September.

Toward the end of their stay, flycatchers though they are, they feed
largely upon berries. I have seen a dozen in one small dogwood bush,
all eating greedily.




XIII

THE HUMMINGBIRD


Hummingbirds are found only in America and on the islands near it.
They are of many kinds, but only one kind is ever seen in the eastern
United States. This is known as the ruby-throated hummingbird, because
of a splendid red throat-patch worn by the male. To speak more exactly,
the patch is red only in some lights. You see it one instant as black
as a coal, and the next instant it flashes like a coal on fire. This
ornament,--a real jewel,--with the lovely shining green of the bird’s
back, makes him an object of great beauty.

Every one knows him, or would do so only that some people confuse him
with bright-colored, long-tongued hummingbird moths that are seen
hovering, mostly in the early evening, over the flowers of the garden.

The ruby-throat spends the winter south of the United States. He
arrives in Florida in March, but does not reach New England till near
the middle of May.

Many persons seem to imagine that the hummer lives on the wing. They
have never seen one sitting still, they say. But the truth is that
hummingbirds pass but a small part of the time in the air. They are so
very small, however, that they are easily overlooked on a branch of a
tree, and the average person never notices them except when the hum of
their wings attracts his attention.

One of the prettiest sights in the world is a hummingbird hovering
before a blossom, his wings vibrating so fast as to make a mist about
him, and his long needle of a bill probing the flower with quick, eager
thrusts. All his movements are of lightning-like rapidity, and even
while your eyes are on him he is gone like a flash, you cannot say
whither.

The hummingbird’s nest is built on a branch of a tree,--saddled on
it,--and is not very hard to find after you have once seen one, and so
have learned precisely what to look for. Generally it is placed well
out towards the end of the limb. I have found it on pitch-pines in the
woods, on roadside maples,--shade-trees,--and especially in apple and
pear orchards. The mother bird is very apt to betray its whereabouts by
buzzing about the head of any one who comes near it.

[Illustration: RUBY-THROATED HUMMINGBIRD

_1, 2. Males. 3. Female. 4. Young_]

Last May, for example, I stopped in the middle of the road to listen
for the voice of a house wren, when I caught instead the buzz and
squeak of a hummer. Turning my gaze upward, I saw her fly to a
half-built nest on a maple branch directly over my head.

The nest is a tiny thing, looking for size and shape like a cup out
of a child’s toy tea-set. Its walls are thick, and on the outside are
covered--shingled, we may say--with bits of gray lichen, which help to
make the nest look like nothing more than a knot. Whether they are put
on for that purpose, or by way of ornament, is more than I can tell.

The bird always lays two white eggs, about as large as peas. The young
ones stay in the nest for three weeks, more or less, till they are
fully grown and fledged, and perfectly well able to fly. I once saw
one take his first flight, and a great venture it seemed. All these
three weeks, and for another week afterward, the mother--no father is
present--has her hands full to supply the little things with food,
which she gives them from her crop, thrusting her long, sharp bill
clean down their throats in the process, in a way to make a looker-on
shiver. The only note I have ever heard from the ruby-throat is a
squeak, which seems to be an expression of nervousness or annoyance,
and is uttered whenever an intruder--a man, a cat, or a strange
bird--comes near the tree in which her treasures are hidden.

Hummingbirds sometimes fly into open windows and are caught. At such
times they become tame almost at once, but it is difficult, if not
impossible, to keep them alive in captivity, and it is cruel to attempt
it, except when the little creature is injured and plainly unable to
look out for itself.

A lady of my acquaintance discovered a hummingbird under her piazza. It
had flown in by accident, probably, and now was darting to and fro in
a frantic attempt to get out. The piazza was open on three sides, to
be sure, but the frightened bird kept up against the ceiling, and of
course found itself walled in.

Fearful that it would injure itself, the lady brought a broom and tried
to force it to come down and so discover its way out; but it was only
the more scared. Then a happy thought came to her. She went to the
garden, plucked a few flowers, and going back to the piazza, set them
down for the bird to see. Instantly it flew toward them, and as it did
so it saw the open world without, and away it went.

Another lady wrote me once a very pretty story of a hummer that came
and probed a nasturtium which she held in her hand.

It is wonderful to think that so tiny a bird, born in New England or in
Canada in June, should travel to Cuba or Central America in the autumn,
and the next spring find its way back again to its birthplace.




XIV

THE CHIMNEY SWIFT


Every kind of bird is adapted to get its living in a particular way.
It is strong in some respects, and weak in others. Some birds have
powerful legs, but can hardly fly; others live on the wing, and can
hardly walk. Of these flying birds none is more common than the chimney
swift, or, as he is improperly called, the chimney swallow. No one ever
saw him sitting on a perch or walking on the ground. In fact, his wings
are so long, and his legs so short and weak, that if he were to alight
on the ground, he would probably never be able to rise into the air
again.

He hardly seems to need a description, and yet I suppose that many
persons, not to say people in general, do not know him from a swallow.
His color is sooty brown, turning to gray on the throat. His body, as
he is seen in the air, is shaped like a bobbin, bluntly pointed at both
ends. If he is carefully watched, however, it will be noticed that
he spreads his tail for an instant whenever he changes suddenly the
direction of his flight. In other words, he uses his tail as a rudder.

He shoots about the sky at a tremendous speed, much of the time
sailing, with his long, narrow wings firmly set, and is especially
lively and noisy toward nightfall. Very commonly two or three of the
birds fly side by side, cackling merrily and acting very much as if
they were amusing themselves with some kind of game.

They feed on the wing, and have wide, gaping mouths perfectly adapted
to that purpose.

As their name implies, they build their nests and pass the night mostly
in chimneys, although in the wilder parts of the country they still
inhabit hollow trees. Numbers of pairs live together in a colony.

One of the chimneys of a certain house near the Charles River, in
Newton, Massachusetts, has for many years been a favorite resort of
swifts. I have many times visited the place to watch the birds go to
roost. Little by little they gather in a flock, as twilight comes on,
and then for an hour or more the whole company, hundreds in number,
go sweeping over the valley in broad circles, having the chimney for
a centre. Gradually the circles become narrower, and at the same
time the excitement of the flock increases. Again and again the birds
approach the chimney, as if they meant to descend into it. Then away
they shoot for another round.

At length the going to roost actually begins. Half a dozen or a dozen
of the birds drop one by one into the chimney. The rest sweep away, and
when they come back, a second detachment drops in. And so the lively
performance goes on till the last straggler folds his wings above the
big black cavity and tumbles headlong out of sight.

The swift makes his nest of twigs, and as he cannot alight on the
ground in search of them, he is compelled to gather them from the dead
limbs of trees. Over and over again you will see the bird dart against
such a limb, catching at a twig as he pauses for the merest instant
before it. It is difficult to be sure whether he succeeds or not, his
movements are so rapid, but it is certain that he must often fail.
However, he acts upon the old motto, “Try, try again,” and in course of
time the nest is built. And an extremely pretty nest it is, with the
white eggs in it, the black twigs glued firmly together with the bird’s
own saliva.




XV

NIGHTHAWK AND WHIP-POOR-WILL


Rustic people are a little shy of theories and “book-learning.” Not
long ago--it was early in March--I met an old man who lives by himself
in a kind of hermitage in the woods, and who knows me in a general way
as a bird student. We greeted each other, and I inquired whether he had
seen any bluebirds yet. No, he said, it wasn’t time.

“Oh, but they are here,” I answered. “I saw a flock of ten on the 26th
of February.” Good-natured incredulity came out all over his face.

“Did you hear them sing?” he asked.

“Yes,” said I; “and, furthermore, I saw some this forenoon very near
your house.”

“Well,” he remarked, “according to my experience, it is too early for
bluebirds. Besides, they never go in flocks; and when anybody tells
me at this time of the year that he has seen a flock of bluebirds, I
always know that he has seen some blue snowbirds.”

He spoke with an air of finality which left me nothing to do but to
smile and pass on.

This little incident called to mind another, and that put it into my
head to write this article.

A farmer, who had seen me passing his house and loitering about
his lanes and fields for several years, often with an opera-glass
in my hand, one day hailed me to ask whether the nighthawk and the
whip-poor-will were the same bird, as he had heard people say. I
assured him (or rather I told him--it turned out that I had not made
him sure) that they were quite distinct, and proceeded to remark
upon some of the more obvious points of difference between the two,
especially as to their habits and manner of life. He listened with all
deference to what I had to offer, but as I concluded and turned to
leave him, he said: “Well, some folks _say_ they’re the same. They say
one’s the he one and t’ other’s the she one; but I guess they ain’t.”

Verily, thought I, popular science lectures are sometimes a failure.
Not long afterward I was telling the story to a Massachusetts man, a
man who had made a collection of birds’ eggs in his time.

“Why,” said he, “aren’t they the same? I always understood that they
were the male and female of the same species. That was the common
belief where I was brought up.”

[Illustration: NIGHTHAWK]

The confusion of the two birds is widespread, in spite of Audubon’s
testimony that he had seldom seen a farmer or even a boy in the United
States who did not know the difference between them. But, while they
resemble each other closely, they are sufficiently unlike to be
classified not only as separate species, but as species of different
genera. As for the difference in their habits, it is such as any one
may see and appreciate. The nighthawk, for all its name, is not a night
bird. It is most active at twilight,--in other words, it is crepuscular
instead of nocturnal,--but is often to be seen flying abroad at midday.
The whip-poor-will, on the contrary, is quiet till after dark. Then
it starts into fullness of life, singing with the utmost enthusiasm,
till the listener wonders where it can find breath for such rapid and
long-continued efforts. The nighthawk is not a musician. While flying
it frequently utters a single note, of a guttural-nasal quality, almost
indistinguishable from the so-called bleat of the woodcock; but, in
place of singing, it indulges in a fine aerial tumbling performance,
much in the manner of the snipe. This performance I have many times
observed in early summer from the Public Garden in Boston. I have
seen it also in September, though it is doubtless much less common at
that season. The bird rises gradually to a considerable height, and
presently drops like a stone almost to the ground. At the last moment
it arrests itself suddenly, and then is heard a very peculiar “booming”
noise, whether produced by the wings or by the voice, I will not
presume to say.

The most attractive feature of the nighthawk, to my eye, is its
beautiful and peculiar flight--a marvel of ease and grace, and
sufficient to distinguish it at a glance from every other New England
bird. It is a creature of the upper air, never skimming the ground, so
far as I know, and as it passes overhead you may easily see the large
white patch in the middle of each long wing--a beauty spot, by the way,
which is common to both sexes, and is wanting in the whip-poor-will.

[Illustration: WHIP-POOR-WILL]

The whip-poor-will’s chief distinction is its song--a song by itself,
and familiar to every one. Some people call it mournful, and I fear
there are still a few superstitious souls who listen to it with a
kind of trembling. I have heard of the bird’s being shot because the
inhabitants of a house could not bear its doleful and boding cry, as
they were pleased to consider it. To my ears it is sweet music. I take
many an evening stroll on purpose to enjoy it, and am perennially
thankful to Audubon for saying that he found the whip-poor-will’s
“cheering voice” more interesting than the song of the nightingale.

It will surprise unscientific readers to be told that the nearest
relatives of whip-poor-wills and nighthawks are the swifts and the
hummingbirds. As if a chimney swift were more like a whip-poor-will
than like a swallow! and, still more absurd, as if there were any
close relationship between whip-poor-wills and hummingbirds! Put
a whip-poor-will and a ruby-throated hummer side by side and they
certainly do look very little alike--the big whip-poor-will, with its
mottled plumage and its short, gaping beak, and the tiny hummingbird
with its burnished feathers and its long needle of a bill. Evidently
there is no great reliance to be placed upon outside show, or what
scientific men call “external characters.” We might as well say that
the strawberry vine and the apple-tree were own cousins. Yes, so we
might, for the apple-tree and the strawberry vine _are_ cousins--at
least they are members of the same great and noble family, the family
of the roses! We shall never get far, in science or in anything else,
until we learn to look below the surface.




XVI

THE FLICKER


The flicker is the largest of our common American woodpeckers, being
somewhat longer and stouter than the robin. It is known, by sight
at least, to almost every one who notices birds at all, and perhaps
for this reason it has received an unusual number of popular names.
“Golden-winged woodpecker,” which is probably the best known of these,
comes from the fact that the bird’s wings are yellow on the under side.
“Harry Wicket,” “Highhole,”--because its nest is sometimes pretty far
above the ground,--“Yellowhammer,” and “Pigeon-woodpecker” are also
among its more familiar nicknames.

Unlike other birds of its family, the flicker passes much of its time
on the ground, where it hops awkwardly about, feeding upon insects,
especially upon ants. As you come near it, while it is thus engaged, it
rises with a peculiar purring sound, and as it flies from you it shows
a broad white patch on its rump--the lower back, above the root of
the tail. Every one who has ever walked much over grassy fields must
have seen the bird and been struck by this conspicuous light mark. He
must have noticed, too, the bird’s peculiar up-and-down, “jumping”
manner of flight, by which it goes swooping across the country in long
undulations or waves.

The flicker’s general color is brown, with spottings and streakings
of black, and more or less of violet or lilac shading. On the back of
its neck it wears a band of bright scarlet, and across its breast is a
conspicuous black crescent.

It is fond of old apple orchards, and often makes its nest in a
decaying trunk. In some places, near the seashore, especially,--where
it is commoner than elsewhere in winter, and where large trees are
scarce,--it makes enemies by its habit of drilling holes in barns and
even in churches. I remember a meeting-house on Cape Cod which had a
good number of such holes in its front wall--or rather it had the scars
of such holes, for they had been covered with patches of tin. That was
a case where going to church might be called a bad habit.

In fall and winter, if not at other seasons, the flicker feeds largely
upon berries. In years when the poison ivy bears a good crop, I am
pretty sure to find two or three flickers all winter long about a
certain farm, the stone walls of which are overrun with this handsome
but unwholesome vine, although it is hard to imagine that the dry,
stony fruit should yield much in the way of nourishment, even to a
woodpecker.

As spring comes on, the flicker becomes numerous and very noisy. His
best-known vocal effort is a prolonged _hi-hi-hi_, very loud and
ringing, and kept up until the listener wonders where the author of it
gets his wind. This, I think, is the bird’s substitute for a song. He
has at all times a loud, unmusical _yawp_,--a signal, I suppose,--and
in the mating season especially he utters a very affectionate,
conversational _wicker_ or _flicker_. Every country boy should be
familiar with these three notes.

[Illustration: FLICKER

_1. Male. 2. Females_]

But besides being a vocalist,--we can hardly call him a singer,--the
flicker is a player upon instruments. He is a great drummer; and if
any one imagines that woodpeckers do not enjoy the sound of their
own music, he should watch a flicker drumming with his long bill on
a battered tin pan in the middle of a pasture. Morning after morning
I have seen one thus engaged, drumming lustily, and then cocking his
head to listen for an answer; and Paderewski at his daily practice upon
the piano could not have looked more in earnest. At other times the
flicker contents himself with a piece of resonant loose bark or a dry
limb.

One proof that this drumming--which is indulged in by woodpeckers
generally--is a true musical performance, and not a mere drilling for
grubs, is the fact that we never hear it in winter. It begins as the
weather grows mild, and is as much a sign of spring as the peeping of
the little tree-frogs--hylas--in the meadow.

The flicker’s nest, as I have said, is built in a hole in a tree, often
an apple-tree. Very noisy in his natural disposition, he keeps a wise
silence while near the spot where his mate is sitting, and will rear
a brood under the orchard-owner’s nose without betraying himself. The
young birds are fed from the parent’s crop, as young pigeons and young
hummingbirds are. The old bird thrusts its bill down the throat of
the nestling and gives it a meal of partially digested food by what
scientific people call a process of regurgitation. Farmers’ boys, who
have watched pigeons feeding their squabs, will know precisely what is
meant.




XVII

THE BITTERN


It was a great day for me when I first heard the so-called booming of
the bittern. For more than ten years I had devoted the principal part
of my spare hours to the study of birds, but though I had taken many
an evening walk near the most promising meadows in my neighborhood, I
could never hear those mysterious pumping or stake-driving noises of
which I had read with so much interest, especially in the writings of
Thoreau.

The truth was, as I have since assured myself, that this representative
of the heron family was not a resident within the limits of my everyday
rambles, none of the meadows thereabout being extensive and secluded
enough to suit his whim.

There came a day, however, when with a friend I made an afternoon
excursion to Wayland, Massachusetts, on purpose to form the
stake-driver’s acquaintance. We walked up the railway track across
the river toward Sudbury, and were hardly seated on the edge of the
meadow, facing the beautiful Nobscot Hill, before my comrade said,
“Hark! There he is!”

Yes, that certainly was the very sound--an old-fashioned wooden pump at
work in the meadow.

We listened intently for perhaps half a dozen times; then I proposed
going further up the track to get the notes at shorter range, and
possibly--who could tell what unheard-of thing might happen?--to obtain
a sight of the bird. We advanced cautiously, though as we were on the
track, six feet or more above the level of the meadow, there was no
chance of concealment, and the bittern went on with his performance.

Meanwhile we maintained a sharp lookout, and presently I descried
a narrow brown object standing upright amidst the grass--a stick,
perhaps. I lifted my opera-glass and spoke quickly to my friend: “I see
him!”

“Where?” he asked; and when I lowered my glass and gave him the bird’s
bearings as related to the remains of an old hayrick not far off, he
said, “Why, I saw that, but took it for a stick.”

“Yes, but see the eye,” I answered.

Within half a minute the bird suddenly threw his head forward and
commenced pumping. This was good luck indeed,--that I should surprise
my very first bittern in his famous act, a thing which better men than
I, after years of familiarity with the bird, had never once succeeded
in accomplishing. Who says that Fortune does not sometimes favor the
fresh hand?

The fellow repeated the operation three times, and between whiles moved
stealthily through the grass toward the leavings of the haycock before
mentioned.

When he reached the hay, we held our breath. Would he actually mount
it? Yes, that was undoubtedly his intention; but he meant to do it in
such a way that no mortal eye should see him. All the time glancing
furtively to left and right, as if the grass were full of enemies, he
put one foot before the other with almost inconceivable slowness,--as
the hour hand turns on the clock’s face. It was an admirable display
of an art which this race of frog, mouse, and insect catchers has
cultivated for untold generations--an art on which its livelihood
depends, the art of invisible motion.

There was no resisting the ludicrousness of his manner. He was in full
view, but so long as he kept still he seemed to think himself quite
safe from detection. Like the hand of the clock, however, if he was
slow he was sure, and in time he was fairly out of the grass, standing
in plain sight upon his hay platform.

Once in position he fell to pumping in earnest, and kept it up for more
than an hour, while two enthusiasts sat upon the railway embankment,
twelve or thirteen rods distant, with opera-glasses and note-books,
scrutinizing his every motion, and felicitating themselves again and
again on seeing thus plainly what so few had ever seen at all. What
would Thoreau have given for such an opportunity?

“The stake-driver is at it in his favorite meadow,” he writes in
his journal, in 1852. “I followed the sound, and at last got within
two rods, it seeming always to recede, and drawing you, like a
will-o’-the-wisp, farther away into the meadows. When thus near, I
heard some lower sounds at the beginning like striking on a stump or a
stake, a dry, hard sound, and then followed the gurgling, pumping notes
fit to come from a meadow.

“This was just within the blueberry and other bushes, and when the bird
flew up, alarmed, I went to the place, but could see no water, which
makes me doubt if water is necessary to it in making the sound. Perhaps
it thrusts its bill so deep as to reach water where it is dry on the
surface.”

This notion that water is employed in the production of the bittern’s
notes has been generally entertained. The notes themselves are of a
character to suggest such an hypothesis, and at least one witness has
borne circumstantial testimony to its truth. In Thoreau’s essay on the
“Natural History of Massachusetts,” he says:--

“On one occasion, the bird has been seen by one of my neighbors to
thrust its bill into the water, and suck up as much as it could hold;
then, raising its head, it pumped it out again with four or five heaves
of the neck, throwing it two or three feet, and making the sound each
time.”

Similar statements have been made as to the corresponding notes of
the European bittern. None of our systematic writers upon American
ornithology have ever witnessed the performance, as far as appears, and
being too honest to draw upon their imaginations, they have left the
matter a mystery. Now, on this auspicious May afternoon, if we learned
nothing else, we could at all events make quite sure whether or not the
bittern did really spout water from his beak.

My readers will have guessed already that our bird, at least, did
nothing of the sort. His bill was never within reach of water. The
operation is a queer one, hard to describe.

The bittern has been standing motionless, perhaps in the humpbacked
attitude in which the artists, following Audubon’s plate, have commonly
represented him; or quite as likely, he has been making a stick or a
soldier of himself, standing bolt upright at full stretch, his long
neck and bill pointed straight at the zenith.

Suddenly he lowers his head, and instantly raises it again and throws
it forward with a quick, convulsive jerk. This movement is attended
by an opening and shutting of the bill, which in turn is accompanied
by a sound which has been well compared to a violent hiccough. The
hiccough--with which, I think, the click of the big mandibles may
sometimes be heard--is repeated a few times, each time a little louder
than before; and then succeed the real pumping or stake-driving noises.

These are in sets of three syllables each, of which the first syllable
is the longest, and somewhat separated from the others. The accent is
strongly upon the middle syllable, and the whole, as oftenest heard, is
an exact reproduction of the sound of a wooden pump, as I have already
said, the voice having that peculiar hollow quality which is produced,
not by the flow of the water, but by the suction of the air in the tube
when the pump begins to work.

But the looker-on is likely to be quite as much impressed by what he
sees as by what he hears. During the whole performance, but especially
during the latter part of it, the bird is engaged in the most violent
contortions, suggestive of nothing but a patient suffering from
uncontrollable nausea. Moreover, as soon as the preliminary hiccoughs
begin, the lower throat or breast is seen to be swelling; the
dilatation grows larger and larger till the pumping is well under way,
and so far as my companion and I could detect, does not subside in the
least until the noises have ceased altogether.

How are the unique, outlandish notes produced? I cannot profess to
know. Our opinion was that the bird swallowed air into his gullet,
gulping it down with each snap of the beak. To all appearance it was
necessary for him to inflate the crop in this way before he could pump,
or boom. As to how much of the grand booming was connected with the
swallowing of the air, and how much, if any, with the expulsion of it,
my friend and I did not agree, and of course neither of us could do
more than guess.

I made some experiments afterwards, by way of imitating the noises;
and these experiments, together with the fact that the grand booming
seemed to be really nothing more than a development of the preliminary
hiccoughs, and the further fact that the swelling of the breast did not
go down gradually during the course of the performance, but suddenly at
the close,--all these incline me to believe that the notes are mainly
if not entirely caused by the inhalation or swallowing of the air; and
I am somewhat strengthened in this opinion by perceiving that when
a man takes air into his stomach the act is attended by a sound not
altogether unlike the bittern’s note in quality, while the expulsion of
it gives rise to noises of an entirely dissimilar character.

That the sounds in question were not made entirely by any ordinary
action of the vocal organs was the decided opinion of both my friend
and myself.

As I have said, we watched the performance for more than an hour. We
were sitting squarely upon the track, and once were compelled to get
up to let a train pass; but the bittern evidently paid no attention to
matters on the railway, being well used to thunder in that direction,
and stood his ground without wincing.

When he had pumped long enough,--and the operation surely looked like
pretty hard work,--he suddenly took wing and flew a little distance
down the meadow. The moment he dropped into the grass he pumped, and
on making another flight he again pumped immediately upon coming to
the ground. This trick, which surprised me not a little in view of
the severe exertion required, is perhaps akin to the habit of smaller
birds, who in seasons of excitement will very often break into song at
the moment of striking a perch.

As we came down the track on our way back to the station, three
bitterns were in the air at once, while a fourth was booming on the
opposite side of the road. One of the flying birds persistently dangled
his legs instead of drawing them up in the usual fashion and letting
the feet stick out behind, parallel with the tail. Probably he was
“showing off,” as is the custom of many birds during the season of
mating.

Our bird across the road, by the bye, was not pumping, but driving a
stake. The middle syllable was truly a mighty whack with a mallet on
the head of a post, so that I could easily enough credit Mr. Samuels’s
statement that he once followed the sound for half a mile, expecting to
find a farmer setting a fence.

In the midst of the hurly-burly we saw a boy coming toward us on the
track.

“Let’s ask him about it,” said my companion.

So, with an air of inquisitive ignorance, he stopped the fellow, and
inquired, “Do you know what it is we hear making that curious noise off
there in the meadow?”

The boy evidently took us for a pair of ignoramuses from the city.

“I guess it’s a frog,” he answered. But when the sounds were repeated
he shook his head and confessed honestly that he didn’t know what made
them.

It was too bad, I thought, that he did not stick to his frog theory.
It would have made so much better a story! He appeared to feel no
curiosity about the matter, and we allowed him to pass on unenlightened.

Not all Wayland people are thus poorly informed, however, and we
shortly learned, to our considerable satisfaction, that they have a
most felicitous local name for the bird. They call him “plum-pudd’n’,”
which is exactly what he himself says, only that his _u_ is in both
words somewhat long, like the vowel in “full.” To get the true effect
of the words they should be spoken with the lips nearly closed, and in
a deep voice.

A few days after this excursion I found a bittern in a large wet meadow
somewhat nearer home. At the nearest he was a long way off, and as I
went farther and farther away from him, I remarked the very unexpected
fact that the last syllable to be lost was not the second, which bears
so sharp an accent, but the long first syllable. It seemed contrary to
reason, but such was unquestionably the truth, and later experiments
confirmed it.

This was in the spring of 1888. In May of the next year, if all went
well, we would see the show again. So we said to each other; but a
veteran ornithologist remarked that we should probably be a good many
years older before we had another such piece of good fortune.

It is a fact familiar to all naturalists, however, that when you have
once found a new plant, or a new bird, or a new nest, the experience is
likely to be soon repeated. You may have spent a dozen years in a vain
search, but now, for some reason, the difficult has all at once become
easy, and almost before you can believe your eyes the rarity has grown
to be a drug in the market. Something like this proved to be true of
the bittern’s boom.

On the afternoon of the 2d of May, 1889, I went to one of my favorite
resorts, a large cat-tail swamp surrounded by woods. My particular
errand was to see whether the least bittern had arrived,--a much
smaller, and in this part of the country, at least, a much less common
bird than his relative of whose vocal accomplishments I am here
treating.

I threw myself down upon the cliff overhanging the edge of the swamp,
to listen for the desired _coo-coo-coo-coo_, and had barely made myself
comfortable when I heard the _plum-pudd’n’_ of the bittern himself,
proceeding, as it seemed, from the reeds directly at my feet. Further
listening satisfied me that the fellow was not far from the end of a
rocky peninsula which juts into the swamp just at this point.

I slipped down the cliff as quietly as possible, picked my way across
the narrow neck leading to the main peninsula, and by keeping behind
rocks and trees managed to reach the very tip without disturbing
the bird. Here I posted myself among the thick trees, and awaited
a repetition of the boom. It was not long in coming, and plainly
proceeded from a bunch of flags just across a little stretch of clear
water.

I looked and looked, while the bittern continued to pump at rather
protracted intervals; but I could see nothing whatever, till presto!
there the creature stood in plain sight.

Whether he had moved into view, or had all the time been visible, I
cannot tell. He soon pumped again, and then again, for perhaps six
times. Then he stalked away out of sight, and I heard nothing more. He
was much nearer than last year’s bird had been, but was still a pumper,
not a stake-driver, and his action was in all respects the same as I
had before witnessed.

There had been no bittern in this swamp the season previous, nor did
any breed here this summer. I visited the place too often for him to
have escaped my notice, had he been present. This bird, then, was a
migrant, and his booming was of interest as showing that the bittern,
like the song-birds, does not wait to get into summer quarters before
beginning to rehearse his love music.

Two days after this my companion of the year before went with me again
to Wayland, and, not to prolong a long story, we sat again upon the
railway and watched a bittern pump for more than an hour. This time, to
be sure, he was partially concealed by the grass, besides being farther
away than we could have wished.

It was curious, and illustrated strikingly the utility of the bird’s
habit of standing motionless, that my friend, who is certainly as
sharp-eyed an observer as I have ever known, was once more completely
taken in. As luck would have it, I caught sight of the bird first, and
when I pointed him out to the other man he replied, “Why, of course I
saw that, but it never occurred to me but that it was a stake.”

We returned from this excursion fairly well convinced that in the early
part of the season, while the grass is still short, one may hope to
see a bittern pump almost any day, if he will go to a suitable meadow
which has a railroad running through it. The track answers a double
purpose: it gives the observer an outlook, such as cannot be obtained
from a boat, and furthermore, the birds are quite unsuspicious of
things on the track, while the presence of a man in the grass or on the
river would almost inevitably attract their attention.




XVIII

BIRDS FOR EVERYBODY


Some birds belong exclusively to specialists. They are so rare, or
their manner of life is so seclusive, that people in general can never
be expected to know them except from books. The latest list of the
birds of Massachusetts includes about three hundred and fifty species
and sub-species. Of these, seventy-five or more are so foreign to this
part of the country as to have appeared here only by accident, while
many others are so excessively rare that no individual observer can
count upon seeing them, however close a lookout he may keep. Other
species are present in goodly numbers, but only in certain portions of
the State; and still others, though generally distributed and fairly
numerous, live habitually in almost impenetrable swamps or in deep
forests, and of necessity are seen only by those who make it their
business to look for them.

It is something for which busy men and women may well be thankful,
therefore, that so many of the most pleasing, or otherwise
interesting, of all our birds are among those which may be called
birds for everybody. Such are the robin, the bluebird, the Baltimore
oriole,--or golden robin,--the blue jay, the crow, and the chickadee.
Of all these we may say that they are common; they come in every one’s
way, and, what is still more to the point, they cannot be mistaken for
anything else. Others are equally common, and are easily enough seen,
but their identity is not so much a matter of course.

The song sparrow, for example, is abundant in Massachusetts from the
middle of March to the end of October. Outside of the forest it is
almost ubiquitous; it sings beautifully and with the utmost freedom; it
ought, one would say, to be universally known. But it is _a_ sparrow,
not _the_ sparrow. In other words, it is only one of many, and so,
common as it is, and freely as it sings (it is to be heard in every
garden and by every roadside in the latter half of March, when few
other birds are in tune), it passes unrecognized by the generality
of people. They read in books of song sparrows, chipping sparrows,
field sparrows, tree sparrows, swamp sparrows, vesper sparrows,
white-throated sparrows, fox sparrows, yellow-winged sparrows, savanna
sparrows, and the like, and when they see any little mottled brown
bird, they say, “Oh, it’s a sparrow,” and seek to know nothing more.

The family of warblers--among the loveliest of all birds--are in
a still worse case, and much the same may be said of swallows and
blackbirds, thrushes and vireos. The number of species and their
perplexing similarity, which are such an attraction to the student,
prove an effectual bar to those who have time and money for newspapers
and novels, but can spare neither for a manual of local ornithology.

I have named six birds which every one knows, or may know, but of
course I do not mean that these are all. Why should not everybody
know the goldfinch--a small, stout-billed, bright yellow, canary-like
bird, with black wings and tail and a black cap? And the flicker--or
golden-winged woodpecker--a little larger than the robin, with
gold-lined wings, a black crescent on the breast, a red patch on the
back of the head, and a white rump, conspicuous as the bird takes
wing? The hummingbird, too--our only one; I should say that everybody
ought to recognize it, only that I have found some who confuse it with
sphinx moths, and will hardly believe me when I tell them of their
mistake. The cedar-bird, likewise, known also as the cherry-bird and
the waxwing, is a bird by itself; remarkably trim and sleek, its upper
parts of a peculiarly warm cinnamon brown, its lower parts yellowish,
its tail tipped handsomely with yellow, its head marked with black and
adorned with a truly magnificent topknot; as great a lover of cherries
as any schoolboy, and one of the first birds upon which the youthful
taxidermist tries his hand. Just now--in early March--the waxwings are
hereabout in great flocks (I saw more than a hundred, surely, three
days ago), stuffing themselves, literally, with savin berries. These
large flocks will after a while disappear, and some time later, in May,
smaller companies will arrive from the South and settle with us for the
summer, helping themselves to our cherries in return for the swarms of
insects of whose presence they have relieved us. If we see them thus
engaged, we shall do well to remember the Scripture text, “The laborer
is worthy of his hire.”

This enumeration of birds, so strongly marked that even a wayfaring man
may easily name them, might be extended indefinitely. It would be a
strange Massachusetts boy who did not know the ruffed grouse (though he
would probably call him the partridge) and the Bob White; the kingbird,
with his black and white plumage, his aerial tumblings, and his
dashing pursuit of the crow; the splendid scarlet tanager, fiery red,
with black tail and wings; the bobolink; the red-winged blackbird,
whose watery _conkaree_ is so welcome a sound about the meadows in
March; the slate-colored snowbird; the indigo-bird, small, deep blue
throughout, and with a thick bill; the butcher-bird, a constant though
not numerous winter visitor, sometimes flying against windows in which
canaries are hung, as one did at our house only this winter--these
surely may be known by any who will take even slight pains to form
their acquaintance. And, beside these, there are two birds whom
everybody _does_ know, but whom I forgot to include with the six
first mentioned,--the catbird and the brown thrasher, two overgrown,
long-tailed wrens, near relatives of the mockingbird, both of them
great singers in their way, and one of them--the catbird--decidedly
familiar and a fairly good mimic.




XIX

WINTER PENSIONERS


Our northern winter is a lean time, ornithologically, though it brings
us some choice birds of its own, and is not without many alleviations.
When the redpolls come in crowds and the white-winged crossbills in
good numbers, both of which things happened last year, the world is not
half so bad with us as it might be. Still, winter is winter, a season
to be tided over rather than doted upon, and anything which helps to
make the time pass agreeably is matter for thankfulness. So I am asked
to write something about the habit we are in at our house of feeding
birds in cold weather, and thus keeping them under the windows. Really
we have done nothing peculiar, nor has our success been beyond that of
many of our neighbors; but such as it is, the work has given us much
enjoyment, and the readers of “Bird-Lore”[1] are welcome to the story.

Our method is to put out pieces of raw suet, mostly the trimmings of
beefsteak. These we attach to branches of trees and to the veranda
trellis, taking pains, of course, to have them beyond the cat’s reach
(that the birds may feed safely), and at the same time well disposed
for our own convenience as spectators. For myself, in addition, I
generally nail pieces of the bait upon one or two of the outer sills of
my study windows. I like, as I sit reading or writing, to hear now and
then a nuthatch or a chickadee hammering just outside the pane. Often
I rise to have a look at the visitor. There is nothing but the glass
between us, and I can stand near enough to see his beady eyes, and, so
to speak, the expression of his face. Sometimes two birds are there at
once, one waiting for the other. Sometimes they have a bit of a set-to.
Then, certainly, they are not without facial expression.

Once in a while, in severe weather, I have sprinkled crumbs (sweet or
fatty crumbs are best--say bits of doughnut) on the inside ledge, and
then, with the window raised a few inches, have awaited callers. If the
weather is bad enough they are not long in coming. A chickadee alights
on the outer sill, notices the open window, scolds a little (the thing
looks like a trap--at all events it is something new, and birds are
conservative), catches sight of the crumbs (well, now, that’s another
story), ceases his _dee, dee, dee_, and the next minute hops inside.

[Illustration: A DOWNY WOODPECKER]

[Illustration: A BRANCH ESTABLISHMENT]

The crumbs prove to be appetizing, and by the time he has swallowed a
few of them he seems to forget how he came in, and instead of backing
out, as a reasonable being like a chickadee might be expected to do, he
flies to another light of the bay window. Then, lest he should injure
himself, I must get up and catch him and show him to the door. By the
time I have done this two or three times within half an hour, I begin
to find it an interruption to other work, and put down the window.
White-breasted nuthatches and downies come often to the outer sill, but
only the chickadees ever venture inside.

These three are our daily pensioners. If they are all in the tree
together, as they very often are, they take precedence at the larder
according to their size. No nuthatch presumes to hurry a woodpecker,
and no chickadee ever thinks of disturbing a nuthatch. He may fret
audibly, calling the other fellow greedy, for aught I know, and asking
him if he wants the earth; but he maintains a respectful distance.
Birds, like wild things in general, have a natural reverence for size
and weight.

The chickadees are much the most numerous with us, but taking the year
together, the woodpeckers are the most constant. My notes record them
as present in the middle of October, 1899, and now, in the middle of
October, 1900, they are still in daily attendance. Perhaps there were a
few weeks of midsummer when they stayed away, but I think not. One pair
built a nest somewhere in the neighborhood and depended on us largely
for supplies, much to their convenience and our pleasure. As soon as
the red-capped young ones were able to fly, the parents brought them
to the tree and fed them with the suet (it was a wonder how much of it
they could eat), till they were old enough to help themselves. And they
act, old and young alike, as if they owned the place. If a grocer’s
wagon happens to stop under the tree they wax indignant, and remain so
till it drives away. Even the black cat, Satan, has come to acknowledge
their rights in the case, and no longer so much as thinks of them as
possible game.

I have spoken, I see, as if these three species were all; but, not to
mention the blue jays, whose continual visits are rather ineffectively
frowned upon (they carry off too much at once), we had last winter,
for all the latter half of it, a pair of red-bellied nuthatches. They
dined with us daily (pretty creatures they are), and stayed so late
in the spring that I began to hope the handy food-supply would induce
them to tarry for the summer. They were mates, I think. At any rate,
they preferred to eat from the same bit of fat, one on each side, in
great contrast with all the rest of our company. Frequently, too, a
brown creeper would be seen hitching up the trunk or over the larger
limbs. He likes pleasant society, though he has little to say, and
perhaps found scraps of suet in the crevices of the bark, where the
chickadees, who are given to this kind of providence, may have packed
it in store. Somewhat less frequently a goldcrest would come with the
others, fluttering amid the branches like a sprite. One bird draws
another, especially in hard times. And so it happened that our tree,
or rather trees,--an elm and a maple,--were something like an aviary
the whole winter through. It was worth more than all the trouble which
the experiment cost us to lie in bed before sunrise, with the mercury
below zero, and hear a chickadee just outside singing as sweetly as any
thrush could sing in June. If he had been trying to thank us, he could
not have done it more gracefully.

The worse the weather, the better we enjoyed the birds’ society; and
the better, in general, they seemed to appreciate our efforts on their
behalf. It was noticeable, however, that chickadees were with us
comparatively little during high, cold winds. On the 18th of February,
for example, we had a blizzard, with driving snow, the most inclement
day of the winter. At seven o’clock, when I looked out, four downy
woodpeckers were in the elm, all trying their best to eat, though the
branches shook till it was hard work to hold on. They stayed much of
the forenoon. At ten o’clock, when the storm showed signs of abating,
though it was still wild enough, a chickadee made his appearance and
whistled _Phœbe_ again and again--“a long time,” my note says--in his
cheeriest manner. Who can help loving a bird so courageous, “so frolic,
stout, and self-possest”? Emerson did well to call him a “scrap of
valor.” Yet I find from a later note that “there were nothing like
the usual number of chickadees so long as the fury lasted.” Doubtless
most of them stayed among the evergreens. It is an old saying of the
chickadee’s, frequently quoted, “Be bold, be bold, but not too bold.”
On the same day I saw a member of the household snowballing an English
sparrow away from one branch, while a downy woodpecker continued to
feed upon the next one. The woodpecker had got the right idea of
things. Honest folk need not fear the constable.




XX

WATCHING THE PROCESSION


It begins to go by my door about the first of March, and is three full
months in passing. The participants are all in uniform, each after
his kind, some in the brightest of colors, some in Quakerish grays
and browns. They seem not to stand very strictly upon the order of
their coming; red-coats and blue-coats travel side by side. Like the
flowers, they have a calendar of their own, and in their own way are
punctual, but their movements are not to be predicted with anything
like mathematical nicety. Of some companies of them I am never certain
which will precede the other, just as I can never tell whether, in a
particular season, the anemone or the five-finger will come first into
bloom. They need no bands of music, no drum-corps nor fifers. The whole
procession, indeed, is itself a band of music, a grand army of singers
and players on instruments. They sing many tunes; each uniform has a
tune of its own, but, unlike what happens in military and masonic
parades, there is never any jangling, no matter how near together the
different bands may be marching.

As I said, the pageant lasts for three months. It is fortunate for
me, perhaps, that it lasts no longer; for the truth is, I have grown
so fond of watching it that I find it hard to attend to my daily work
so long as the show continues. If I go inside for half a day, to read
or to write, I am all the time thinking of what is going on outside.
Who knows what I may be missing at this very minute? I keep by me a
prospectus of the festival, a list of all who are expected to take part
in it, and, like most watchers of such parades, I have my personal
favorites for whom I am always on the lookout. One thing troubles me:
there is never a year that I do not miss a good many (a _bad_ many, I
feel like saying) of those whose names appear in the announcements.
Some of them, indeed, I have _never_ seen. If they are really in the
ranks, it must be that their numbers are very small; for the printed
programme tells exactly how they will be dressed, and I am sure I
should recognize them if they came within sight. Some of them, I fancy,
do not keep their engagements.

I spoke, to begin with, of their passing my door. But I spoke
figuratively. Some, it is true, do pass my door, and even tarry for a
day or two under my windows, but to see others I have to go into the
woods. Some I find only in deep, almost impenetrable swamps, dodging in
and out among thick bushes and cat-tails. A good many follow the coast.
I watch them running along the sea-beach on the edge of the surf, or
walking sedately over muddy flats where I need rubber boots in which to
follow them. Some are silent during the day, but as darkness comes on
indulge in music and queer aerial dancing.

Many travel altogether by night, resting and feeding in the daytime.
It is pleasant to stand out of doors in the evening, and hear them
calling to each other overhead as they hasten northward; for at this
time of the year, I have forgotten to say, they are always traveling in
a northerly direction.

The procession, as such, has no definite terminus. It breaks up
gradually by the dropping out of its members here and there. Each of
them knows pretty well where he is going. This one, who came perhaps
from Cuba, means to stop in Massachusetts; that one, after a winter
in Central America, has in view a certain swamp or meadow, or, it may
be, some mountain-top, in New Hampshire; another will not be at home
till he reaches the furthermost coast of Labrador or the banks of
the Saskatchewan. The prospectus of which I spoke, and of which every
reader ought to have a copy, tells, in a general way, whither each
company is bound, but the members of the same company often scatter
themselves over several degrees of latitude.

Some of the companies move compactly, and are only two or three days,
more or less, in passing a given point. You must be in the woods, for
example, on the 12th or 13th of May, or you will miss them altogether.
Others straggle along for a whole month. You begin to think, perhaps,
that they mean to stay with you all summer, but some morning you wake
up to the fact that the last one has gone.

It is curious how few people see this army of travelers. They pass by
thousands and hundreds of thousands. More than a hundred different
companies go through every town in Massachusetts between March 1 and
June 1. They dress gayly--not a few of them seem to have borrowed
Joseph’s coat--and are full of music, yet somehow their advent excites
little remark. Perhaps it is because, for the most part, they flit
from bush to bush and from tree to tree, here one and there one. If
some year they should form in line, and move in close order along the
public streets, what a stir they would excite! For a day or two the
newspapers would be full of the sensation, and possibly the baseball
reporters would be compelled for once to shorten their accounts of
Battum’s “wonderful left-hand catch” and Ketchum’s “phenomenal slide to
the second base.” It is just as well, I dare say, that nothing of this
kind should ever happen, for it is hard to see how the great reading
public could bear even the temporary loss of such interesting and
instructive narratives.

Meantime, though the greater part of the people pay no heed to these
“birds of passage,” some of us are never tired of watching them. I
myself used to be fond of gazing at military and political parades.
In my time I have seen a good many real soldiers and a good many
make-believes. But as age comes on, I find myself, rightly or wrongly,
caring less and less for such spectacles. It will never be so, I think,
with the procession of which I am now writing. I have never watched it
with more enthusiasm than this very year. It is only just over, but
I am already beginning to count upon its autumnal return, and by the
middle of August shall be looking every day for its advance couriers.

Till then I shall please myself with observing the ways of such of the
host as have happened to drop out of the procession in my immediate
neighborhood. One of them I can hear singing at this very moment. He
and his wife spent the winter in Mexico, as well as I can determine,
and have been back with us since the 11th of May. They have pitched
their tent for the summer in the top of a tall elm directly in front
of my door, and just now are much occupied with household cares. The
little husband (_Vireo gilvus_ he is called in the official programme,
but I have heard him spoken of, not inappropriately, as the warbling
vireo) takes upon himself his full share of the family drudgery, and it
is very pretty indeed to see him sitting in the tent and singing at his
work. He sets us all, as I think, an excellent example.




XXI

SOUTHWARD BOUND


While walking through a piece of pine wood, three or four days ago, I
was delighted to put my eye unexpectedly upon a hummingbird’s nest. The
fairy structure was placed squarely upon the upper surface of a naked,
horizontal branch, and looked so fresh, trimmed outwardly with bits
of gray lichen, that I felt sure it must have been built this year.
But where now were the birds that built it, and the nestlings that
were hatched in it? Who could tell? In imagination I saw the mother
sitting upon the tiny, snow-white eggs, and then upon the two little
ones--little ones, indeed, no bigger than bumble-bees at first. I saw
her feeding them day by day, as they grew larger and larger, till at
last the cradle was getting too narrow for them, and they were ready
to make a trial of their wings. But where were they now? Not here,
certainly. For a fortnight I had been passing down this path almost
daily, and not once had I seen a hummingbird.

No, they are not here, and even as I write I seem to see the little
family on their way to the far south. They are making the journey by
easy stages, I hope--flitting from flower-bed to flower-bed, now in
Connecticut, now in New Jersey, and so on through Pennsylvania and the
Southern States. Will they cross the water to the West Indies, as some
of their kind are said to do? or, less adventurous, will they keep
straight on to some mountain-side in Costa Rica, or even in Brazil? I
should be sorry to believe that the parent birds took their departure
first, leaving the twin children to find their way after them as best
they could--as those who have paid most attention to such matters
assure us that many of our birds are in the habit of doing. But however
they go, and wherever they end their long journey, may wind and weather
be favorable, and old and young alike return, after the winter is over,
to build other nests here in their native New England.

This passing of birds back and forth, a grand semi-annual tide, is to
me a thing of wonder. I think of the millions of sandpipers and plovers
which for two months (it is now late in September) have been pouring
southward along the sea-coast. Some of them passed here on their way
north no longer ago than the last days of May. They went far up toward
the Arctic circle, but before the end of July they were back again,
hastening to the equator. The golden plover, we are told, travels from
Greenland to Patagonia.

All summer the golden warblers were singing within sound of my windows.
As I walked I saw them flitting in and out of the roadside bushes,
beautiful and delicate creatures. But before the first of September the
last of them disappeared. I did not see them depart. They took wing in
the night, and almost before I suspected it they were gone. They will
winter in Central or South America, and, within a week of May-day, we
shall have them here again, as much at home as if they had never left
us.

They were gone before the first of September, I said. But I was
thinking of those which had summered in Massachusetts. In point of
fact, I saw a golden warbler only ten days ago. He was with a mixed
flock of travelers, and, in all likelihood, had come from the extreme
north; for this dainty, blue-eyed warbler is common in summer, not
only throughout the greater part of the United States, but on the
very shores of the Arctic Ocean. So he voyages back and forth, living
his life from land to land, as Tennyson says, led by who knows what
impulse?

  “Sweet bird, thy bower is ever green,
    Thy sky is ever clear;
  Thou hast no sorrow in thy song,
    No winter in thy year.”

It is worth giving a little time daily to what is called ornithology to
be able to greet such wanderers as they come and go. For some days now
a few Western palm warblers have been paying us a visit, and, though
the town has never commissioned me to that office, I have taken it upon
myself to do them the honors. They have met me halfway, at least, as
the everyday expression is; yielding readily to my enticements, and
more than once coming near enough to show me their white lower eyelids,
so that I might be quite sure of their identity. A little later the
_Eastern_ palm warbler will be due, and I hope to find him equally
complaisant; for I wish to see his lower eyelid, also, which is yellow
instead of white.

At this time of the year, indeed, there is no lack of such interesting
and well-dressed strangers, no matter where we may go. The woods are
alive with them by day, and the air by night. There are few evenings
when you may not hear them calling overhead as they hasten southward.
Men who have watched them through telescopes, pointed at the full moon,
have calculated their height at one or two miles. One observer saw
more than two hundred cross the moon’s disk in two hours. The greater
part passed so swiftly as to make it impossible to say more than
that they were birds; but others, flying at a greater altitude, and
therefore traversing the field of vision less rapidly, were identified
as blackbirds, rails, snipe, and ducks. Another observer plainly
recognized swallows, warblers, goldfinches, and woodpeckers.

All over the northern hemisphere to-night, in America, Europe, and
Asia, countless multitudes of these wayfarers will be coursing the
regions of the upper air; and to-morrow, if we go out with our eyes
open, we shall find, here and there, busy little flocks of stragglers
that have stopped by the way to rest and feed: sparrows, snowbirds,
kinglets, nuthatches, chickadees, thrushes, warblers, wrens, and what
not, a few of them singing, and every one of them evidently in love
with life, and full of happy expectations.




INDEX


  Bittern:--
    American, 68.
    least, 78.

  Blackbird, red-winged, 86.

  Bluebird, 44, 59, 83.

  Bob White, 85.

  Bobolink, 86.

  Butcher-bird, 19, 86.


  Catbird, 86.

  Cedar-bird, 84.

  Chickadee, 7, 12, 83, 88, 91, 92.

  Chimney swift, 56, 63.

  Creeper, brown, 10, 91.

  Crossbill, white-winged, 87.

  Crow, 44, 49, 83.


  Flicker, 64, 84.


  Goldfinch, 84.

  Grosbeak:--
    cardinal, 25.
    rose-breasted, 36, 40.

  Grouse, 85.


  Hummingbird, ruby-throated, 51, 63, 84, 99.


  Indigo-bird, 86.


  Jay, blue, 43, 83, 90.


  Kingbird, 47, 85.

  Kinglet:--
    golden-crowned, 1, 91.
    ruby-crowned, 1.


  Migration, 93, 99.

  Mockingbird, 16.


  Nighthawk, 60.

  Nuthatch:--
    red-breasted, 90.
    white-breasted, 88, 89.


  Oriole, Baltimore, 83.


  Partridge, 85.

  Plover, golden, 101.

  Plovers, 100.

  Purple finch, 36, 37.


  Redpoll linnet, 37.

  Robin, 83.


  Sandpipers, 100.

  Shrike:--
    great northern, 19, 86.
    loggerhead, 21.

  Snipe, 61.

  Snowbird (junco), 36, 59, 86.

  Sparrow:--
    chipping, 30, 31.
    English, 30, 92.
    field, 30, 32, 36, 37.
    fox, 36, 37.
    Ipswich, 38.
    savanna, 26, 38.
    song, 26, 36, 37, 39, 83.
    tree, 36, 37, 38.
    vesper, 26, 36, 37, 39.
    white-throated, 36, 37, 38.

  Swift, chimney, 56, 63.


  Tanager:--
    scarlet, 22, 85.
    southern, 25.

  Thrasher, brown, 15, 86.


  Vireo, warbling, 98.

  Vireos, 84.

  Vulture, California, 1, 4.


  Warbler:--
    golden, 101.
    palm, 102.

  Warblers, 84.

  Waxwing, cedar, 84.

  Whip-poor-will, 60.

  Woodcock, 61.

  Woodpecker:--
    downy, 89, 92.
    golden-winged, 64, 84.




  The Riverside Press
  _Electrotyped and printed by H. O. Houghton & Co._
  _Cambridge, Mass., U. S. A._




FOOTNOTE:

  [1] To which this article was originally contributed.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EVERYDAY BIRDS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
